DOC Document making variants with different file extensions (#441)
silverstripe/developer-docs: en/02_Developer_Guides/14_Files/05_File_Manipulation.md

---
title: File manipulation
summary: Learn how to manipulate file records in code
icon: file-medical-alt
---

# File manipulation

Asset storage is provided out of the box via a [Flysystem](https://flysystem.thephpleague.com/docs/) backend store. This abstraction allows for files to be stored in any number of different ways, such as storing them in the cloud, so you cannot rely on having a local file path in order to get and manipulate the contents of any given asset.

Silverstripe CMS provides a well-abstracted API for creating, manipulating, and storing assets.

See [images](./images/) for some image-specific manipulation methods.

## Creating new files in PHP

> When working with files in PHP you can upload a file into a [`File`](api:SilverStripe\Assets\File) dataobject

Reviewer: Don't have a better suggestion on hand at the moment but 'upload a file into a File dataobject' doesn't sit well with me. It's not 'upload' per se and it's not 'into' the DO. Can we find a better wording?

Reviewer 2: That was already the wording being used - I'm not going to change it in this PR. The refactoring was just done so that there's a sensible place for the new documentation to live.

using one of the below methods:

| Method                     | Description                             |
| -------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| `File::setFromLocalFile`   | Load a local file into the asset store  |
| `File::setFromStream`      | Will store content from a stream        |

> | `File::setFromString`      | Will store content from a binary string |

Reviewer: Mix of present/imperative verb with future tense, can we unify?

Reviewer 2: That was already the wording being used - I'm not going to change it in this PR. The refactoring was just done so that there's a sensible place for the new documentation to live.

// Store a file named "example-file.txt".
$fileRecord = File::create();
$fileRecord->setFromString('This is some file content', 'example-file.txt');
$fileRecord->write();
```

If you want to store your file in a [`DBFile`] field directly, or you don't want to use the `File` model for some reason,
you can also use the default [`AssetStore`](api:SilverStripe\Assets\Storage\AssetStore) directly:

```php
use SilverStripe\Assets\File;
use SilverStripe\Assets\Storage\AssetStore;
use SilverStripe\Core\Injector\Injector;
use SilverStripe\ORM\FieldType\DBField;

// Store a file named "example-file.txt".
$store = Injector::inst()->get(AssetStore::class);
$result = $store->setFromString('This is some file content', 'example-file.txt');

// Save a database record that points to the stored file.
// Note that we pull the file name from the result because the asset store might have renamed it.
$dbFile = DBField::create_field('DBFile', $result);
$fileRecord = File::create(['Name' => $result['Filename'], 'File' => $dbFile]);
$fileRecord->write();
```

### Storage conflict resolution

When storing new files, it's possible to determine the mechanism the backend should use when it encounters

> an existing file pattern. The conflict resolution to use can be passed into the third parameter of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an existing file name pattern. The conflict resolution to use can be passed into the third parameter of the
```

Reviewer 2: Done

above methods (after content and filename). The available constants are:

| Constant                            | If an existing file is found then:  |
| ----------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `AssetStore::CONFLICT_EXCEPTION`    | An exception will be thrown         |
| `AssetStore::CONFLICT_OVERWRITE`    | The existing file will be replaced  |

> | `AssetStore::CONFLICT_RENAME`       | The backend will choose a new name. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `AssetStore::CONFLICT_RENAME`       | The backend will choose a new name |
```

Reviewer 2: Done

| `AssetStore::CONFLICT_USE_EXISTING` | The existing file will be used      |

If no conflict resolution scheme is chosen, or an unsupported one is requested, then the backend will choose one.
The default asset store supports each of these.

The conflict resolution is passed in to the `config` argument like so:

```php
use SilverStripe\Assets\File;
use SilverStripe\Assets\Storage\AssetStore;

// Store a file named "example-file.txt".
$fileRecord = File::create();
$fileRecord->setFromString(
    'This is some file content',
    'example-file.txt',
    // If a file with that name already exists, let the file store rename this one.
    config: ['conflict' => AssetStore::CONFLICT_RENAME]
);
$fileRecord->write();
```

See [file storage](./file_storage/) for more details about the way files are stored.

## Accessing files via PHP

> As with storage, there are also different ways of loading the content (or properties) of the file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to storing the files, there are also different ways of loading the content (or properties) of the file:
```

Reviewer 2: That was already the wording being used - I'm not going to change it in this PR. The refactoring was just done so that there's a sensible place for the new documentation to live.

| Method                   | Description                                                |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| `File::getStream`        | Will get an output stream of the file content              |
| `File::getString`        | Gets the binary content                                    |
| `File::getURL`           | Gets the URL for this resource. May or may not be absolute |
| `File::getAbsoluteURL`   | Gets the absolute URL to this resource                     |
| `File::getMimeType`      | Get the mime type of this file                             |
| `File::getMetaData`      | Gets other metadata from the file as an array              |

> | `File::getFileType`      | Return the type of file for the given extension            |

Reviewer: Mixture of verb forms

Reviewer 2: That was already the wording being used - I'm not going to change it in this PR. The refactoring was just done so that there's a sensible place for the new documentation to live.

### Additional file types

Silverstripe CMS has a pre-defined list of common file types. `File::getFileType` will return "unknown" for files outside that list.

> You can add your own file extensions and its description with the following configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add your own file extensions and their description with the following configuration:
```

Reviewer 2: Done

```yml
SilverStripe\Assets\File:
  file_types:
    ai: 'Adobe Illustrator'
    psd: 'Adobe Photoshop File'
```

## Renaming and moving files

In order to move or rename a file you can simply update the `Name` property, or assign the `ParentID` to a new
folder. Please note that these modifications are made simply on the draft stage, and will not be copied

> to live until a publish is made via the CMS (either on this object, or cascading from a parent).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to live stage until a publish is made via the CMS (either on this object, or cascading from a parent).
```

Reviewer 2: That was already the wording being used - I'm not going to change it in this PR. The refactoring was just done so that there's a sensible place for the new documentation to live.

When files are renamed using the ORM, all file variants are automatically renamed at the same time.

```php
use SilverStripe\Assets\File;

$file = File::get()->filter('Name', 'oldname.jpg')->first();
if ($file) {

>   // The below will move 'oldname.jpg' and 'oldname__variant.jpg'
>   // to 'newname.jpg' and 'newname__variant.jpg' respectively
>     $file->Name = 'newname.jpg';
>     $file->write();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // The below will move 'oldname.jpg' and 'oldname__variant.jpg'
    // to 'newname.jpg' and 'newname__variant.jpg' respectively
    $file->Name = 'newname.jpg';
    $file->write();
```

Reviewer 2: Done

}
```

Note that you can cause the file to be moved immediately by [setting the Versioned reading mode](api:SilverStripe\Versioned\Versioned::set_reading_mode()) to draft temporarily.

```php
use SilverStripe\Assets\File;
use SilverStripe\Versioned\Versioned;

$file = File::get()->filter('Name', 'oldname.jpg')->first();
if ($file) {

>   // The below will immediately move 'oldname.jpg' and 'oldname__variant.jpg'
>   // to 'newname.jpg' and 'newname__variant.jpg' respectively

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // The below will immediately move 'oldname.jpg' and 'oldname__variant.jpg'
    // to 'newname.jpg' and 'newname__variant.jpg' respectively
```

Reviewer 2: Done

    $file->Name = 'newname.jpg';
    Versioned::withVersionedMode(function () use ($file) {
        Versioned::set_reading_mode('Stage.' . Versioned::DRAFT);
        $file->write();
        $file->publishSingle();
    });
}
```

## Convert a file to a different format

You can use the [`manipulateExtension()`](api:SilverStripe\Assets\ImageManipulation::manipulateExtension()) method on any `File` or `DBFile` object to create a variant with a different file extension than the original.

This can be very useful if you want to convert a file to a different format for the user to download or view, while leaving the original file intact. Some examples of when you might want this are:

> - Generating thumbnails for videos, documents, etc
> - Converting images to to `.webp` for faster page load times
> - Converting documents to `.pdf` so downloaded documents are more portable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Generating thumbnails for videos, documents, etc.
- Converting images to `.webp` for faster page load times
- Converting documents to `.pdf` so downloaded documents are more portable
```

Reviewer 2: Removed the extra "to" - won't add the fullstop because we're not adding it to the other list items.

### Converting between image formats

> Converting between image formats is the easiest example, because we can let [Intervention Image](https://image.intervention.io/v2) do the heavy lifting for us.

Reviewer 3: Why are we documenting how users can create an extension in their project code to do the conversion?

If we just an existing library to do the conversion shouldn't we just put this code straight into core?

Reviewer 2: a) it demonstrates the concept, and
b) putting this code straight into core is not in scope. There's a follow-up card to do it, but since it hasn't been done yet I'm adding documentation. Could be we add that in tomorrow, but more likely it'll be a while before someone gets to it.

Reviewer 3: We'll just remove this section docs once we do that card though

Doesn't seem like much point peer reviewing something that's just going to get removed

Reviewer 2: I don't think we will remove this section because
> a) it demonstrates the concept

But even if we do, this documentation should be here until that point, because until then we still need to explain how to do this.

```

See [images](./images/) for more information about image-specific manipulation methods.

### Converting between other formats

Converting between other formats (including a non-image to an image) is a little bit more involved, because we have to find another library that will do the conversion for us and then store the new content.

Below are two examples for these conversions - one where the file is converted to an image, and another where the file is converted to a PDF.

These examples won't include performing the actual conversion from one format to another, because that would need to be handled by some third-party library. Instead, they demonstrate how to use the `manipulateExtension()` API to store the converted files as variants.

```php
namespace App\Extension;

use LogicException;
use SilverStripe\Assets\Image_Backend;
use SilverStripe\Assets\Storage\AssetStore;
use SilverStripe\Assets\Storage\DBFile;
use SilverStripe\Core\Extension;
use SilverStripe\Core\Injector\Injector;

class FileConversionExtension extends Extension
{
    private const SUPPORT_CONVERSION_FROM_CATEGORY = [
        'image' => ['video'],
        'pdf' => ['document', 'image'],

>     ];

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Don't bother with implementing quasi validation in example code.  It just makes the code example longer than it needs to be and dilutes the main purpose of it, which is to show how to use manipulateExtension().  There will be loads of cases where the validation isn't strict enough e.g. third-party library can't handle avi video files or the like. Real world validation would happen in `/* some conversion logic goes here */;`

Reviewer 2: I don't agree but it's not worth arguing about. Done.

    /**
     * Create a variant of the file as an image.
     *
     * @param string $newExtension The file extension of the image to create, e.g. "webp"

>      * @throws LogicException if the conversion is not supported

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Done

     */
    public function toImage(string $newExtension): DBFile
    {
        if (!$this->getIsConversionSupported('image')) {
            throw new LogicException('Cannot convert ' . $this->getOwner()->appCategory() . ' to image.');
        }

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Done

        $original = $this->getOwner();
        return $original->manipulateExtension(
            $newExtension,
            function (AssetStore $store, string $filename, string $hash, string $variant) {
                $tmpFilePath = /* some conversion logic goes here */;
                $backend = Injector::inst()->create(Image_Backend::class);
                $backend->loadFrom($tmpFilePath);
                $tuple = $backend->writeToStore(
                    $store,
                    $filename,
                    $hash,
                    $variant,
                    ['conflict' => AssetStore::CONFLICT_USE_EXISTING]

>                 );

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                $config = ['conflict' => AssetStore::CONFLICT_USE_EXISTING];
                $tuple = $backend->writeToStore($store, $filename, $hash, $variant, $config);
```
Do the same for other examples

Reviewer 2: I don't see the point of this (seems very subjective) but I'll do it to avoid peer review ping pong

Reviewer 2: Done

                return [$tuple, $backend];
            }
        );
    }

    /**
     * Create a variant of the file as a pdf.
     *

>      * @throws LogicException if the conversion is not supported

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Done

     */
    public function toPdf(): DBFile
    {
        if (!$this->getIsConversionSupported('pdf')) {
            throw new LogicException('Cannot convert ' . $this->getOwner()->appCategory() . ' to pdf.');
        }

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Done

        $original = $this->getOwner();
        return $file->manipulateExtension(
            'pdf',
            function (AssetStore $store, string $filename, string $hash, string $variant) {
                $tmpFilePath = /* some conversion logic goes here */;
                $tuple = $store->setFromLocalFile(
                    $tmpFilePath,
                    $filename,
                    $hash,
                    $variant,
                    ['conflict' => AssetStore::CONFLICT_USE_EXISTING]
                );
                return [$tuple, null];
            }
        );
    }

    private function getIsConversionSupported(string $convertTo): bool
    {
        return in_array($this->getOwner()->appCategory(), self::SUPPORT_CONVERSION_FROM_CATEGORY[$convertTo]);

>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Done

}
```

After applying the extension to both the `File` and `DBFile` classes, you can use these methods in PHP or in templates.

```yml
SilverStripe\Assets\File:
  extensions:
    - App\Extension\ImageFormatExtension
SilverStripe\Assets\Storage\DBFile:
  extensions:
    - App\Extension\ImageFormatExtension
```

Okay, now lets step through those and take a look at what's going on. We'll only look at the parts that are different from the image-to-image conversion [we looked at earlier](#converting-between-image-formats).

#### Converting something to an image

The main difference between converting between images, and converting a non-image to an image, is that you have to get a third-party to perform the conversion for you.

```php
$tmpFilePath = /* some conversion logic goes here */;
$backend = Injector::inst()->create(Image_Backend::class);

> $backend->loadFrom($tmpFilePath);

Reviewer 3: This is code duplication within documentation

This and the next section should just be inline comments within the sample code

Reviewer 2: This is following the same way I'm walking developers through the code in the "Converting something to an image" and "Converting between image formats" sections. It's a nice way to break down the big chunk of code, without inundating the code with some very verbose commentary.

Reviewer 3: > This is following the same way I'm walking developers through the code in the "Converting something to an image"

This IS the "Converting something to an image" section :-)

> Converting between image formats

I've recommended we don't include that whole section because it's redundant as soon as we implement the image conversion code in core

Reviewer 2: > This IS the "Converting something to an image" section :-)

Sorry, thought this was one down. My point still stands.

> I've recommended we don't include that whole section because it's redundant as soon as we implement the image conversion code in core

I disagree with that recommendation - and even if I followed it, I'd just have to convert basically all of that doc to here instead because it's needed to explain the core concepts at play.
